It is me, Destin, welcome back to Smarter Every Day
There are two things in this world that bothers me: Number one, the fact that the Tasmanian devil
is on the verge of extinction due to a rapidly spreading facial cancer and you did not know it.
And number two, the fact that the guy in the leadership of the immunization effort to save the Tasmanian devil
never watched the Warner Brothers cartoon.
We have to solve these things. So today at Smarter Everyday we go to Tasmania
and I want the record that shows that within two hours an Alabama boy was on the ground,
we had a Tasmanian devil in a bag.
Let's be Smarter Every Day.
- This is Jocelyn, - Hi!
- And this is Alex. - Hey.
- Okay, so this facility is being held by the University of Tasmania, right?
- That's right yes.
- And its purpose is to study a disease that is about to kill the Tasmanian Devils all over the island, right?
- That's right.
(Destin) Welcome to ground zero in the fight against the extinction of an animal species.
These people have put little smart pipe traps across the island to monitor the devils to better understand why they are dying.
(Destin) So the devil would come in here, grab the bait ... (Alex) And then you're pulled here,
(Destin) Pull the rope. (Alex) Pull the rope and the pin,
(Alex) And then this pin locks it so it can not open.
(Destin) And at that moment you caught a devil. (Alex) That's right.
(Destin) Once you catch a devil in a pipe, you have to look into his mouth, so Alex agreed to show me
how they look into their mouths with one of the more manageable devils that keep them trapped.
(Destin) So we are going to put a Tasmanian Devil in a jute bag, or as you call it, a bast fiber bag. (Alex) Yes, that's right.
(Destin) And we're going to check whether the .. (Alex) Well, he had this tumor
(Alex) This DFTD tumor in the gums, on the gums, that is removed ...
(Destin) DFTD. (Alex) That's right. Devil Facial Tumor Disease. (Devil Facial Tumor Disease)
(Destin) Devil Facial Tumor Disease. Okay, so we are going to control
this tasmanian devil for the tumor.
(Alex) Yes, so the tumor was removed two or three years ago,
so we will only check whether the tumor has not grown back. (Destin) Okay.
(Alex) So we're going to put him in the bag and see if he cooperates.
I can open his mouth and take a good look in his mouth or there is no tumor.
(Destin) Beautiful. So I'm going to help you catch a tasmanian devil? (Alex) Yes, yes.
(Alex chuckles)
(Destin) Where do you want me? (Alex) Well, if you can just hold the deskel in front of me.
(Alex) And if we can just ..
(Box creaks)
(Destin) Woow.
(Destin) So you're just going to hold his head?
Ohh, you're going to take his tail?
(Destin) Okay, so we have to come to his mouth now. (Alex) Jup. Well, we will try.
(Destin) So we have a tasmanian devil in a bag.
(Destin) Is it transferable to people? (Alex) No.
(Destin) How do you know that? (Alex) A few people have been stabbed with syringes
and no tumors have ever grown so ..
(Destin) Wow.
(Alex) So I cover more or less his eyes so he can not see,
but I can come to his mouth
(Destin) Where would the tumors sit? (Alex) I think that this tumor first
on this side was here, but he has no sign of a tumor there now.
(Destin) You really love them, do not you? (Alex) Yes.
(Alex) We do not have any signs that devils are becoming immune to the disease,
so it seems that, where the disease comes, the population simply falls. By that
and when a devil gets DFTD, that devil, it does not survive.
(Destin) Why did not I hear about this? A cancer with a 100% mortality probability.
That is a huge thing! To get a better understanding, let's go to the University of Tasmania
and talking with Professor Greg Woods, who is working on a vaccination to beat it.
(Prof. Woods) It is a tumor that occurs in Tasmanian devil and it starts on the face.
So it is called Devil's Face Tumor Disease.
(Destin) And why is this a threat? (Prof. Woods) It is a threat because
it is a very rare cancer. It is a contagious cancer and so far it has about eighty to ninety percent
of the remaining tasmanian devil population killed.
(Destin) Are you serious? In how long? (Prof. Woods) In less than 20 years.
(Destin) Wow! It almost killed it in 20 years. (Prof. Woods) It almost killed a complete animal species, yes.
(Destin) What is this you have on your screen here? (Prof. Woods) This is a map of the DFTD transfers.
So, it started in the most northeastern corner of Tasmania,
and it has since moved to the south and west.
(Destin) So this is like the ripple of death. (Prof. Woods) The ripple of death, yes.
(Destin) You can see it going down on the island. (Prof. Woods) You can see it moving down on the island.
Every year it moves 10 to 20 kilometers.
(Destin) Can you show me what it does? Do you have a picture or something like that?
(Destin) So this is a tasmanian devil's head? (Prof. Woods) This is a healthy devil.
(Destin) Okay. (Prof. Woods) Now, the other half of this devil has a small tumor.
Now, you can see the tumor there. So that's a very young tumor.
(Prof. Woods) In a single devil, actually, it was a female devil ...
(Destin) That would be patient zero, right? (Prof. Woods) What would the patient be?
(Prof. Woods) It has gone from a single cell into a single devil to maybe 100,000 devils who have now been killed
because of this cancer. (Destin) Ohh, wow!
(Prof. Woods) So it's a clonal proliferation of ... (Destin) So it's already Levensweg, but with death.
(Prof. Woods) The game of death, yes.
(Prof. Woods) Every devil who gets it will die from it. (Destin) Really?
(Prof. Woods) It has a 100% mortality number. (Destin) What is the cause of death?
(Prof. Woods) They just can not see so they are unable to eat. (Destin) So they starve to death.
(Prof. Woods) So this is the healthy side. (Destin) Okay.
(Prof. Woods) And this is the sick side. I do not know if you can see it right away,
but you can see a hole here. The cancer cells produce enzymes that digest the bone
and when we open the jaw ... (Destin) The canine is gone.
(Prof. Woods) The canine is gone, so he obviously could not have eaten either.
(Destin) That is amazing. (Prof. Woods) And these fangs are what
they bite each other. So they will bite another devil ... (Destin) Ohh, so that tooth will get infected.
(Prof. Woods) This tooth yes. This tooth will have cancer cells in itself, okay? (Destin) Wow.
(Prof. Woods) So what would happen is, a few cancer cells there. He will bite the other devil and transfer a number of tumor cells.
Greg says they transmit the disease by biting into each other's face. What is very bad news for the
tasmanian devil because all the locals told me that that's how they say hello.
I wanted to verify this for myself so I went to the local zoo
and maybe or maybe not lowered my camera in the loft. Do not collapse it.
(Tasmanian devil is sniffing)
(Destin) Well, this explains how you guys are transferring DFTD ... Wow!
Okay, so I learn. So they transfer DFTD, Devil Facial Tumor Disease, by biting each other.
Look at this, I put my camera towards them.
This is just what they do. They just bite.
All the time.
Why are you biting my camera?
Do not you know you're getting cancer?
(Used on plastic) Wooh!
Watch out for those cameras. Get those cameras up. Yes, do not do that, you will lose the camera.
You will lose the lens and everything.
(Destin) Will they eat it? (Animal caretaker) Nothing over the edge. (Destin) Okay, thank you !.
(Destin) How do you try to beat the cancer? What is the mechanism? What are you doing?
(Prof. Woods) Well the ultimate mechanism is to produce a vaccination. So we have to understand that
understand the immune system of the devils, we must understand the tumor,
we need to know how to make the tumor more visible to the devils their immune system.
(Destin) These men are not just talking. They make huge discoveries.
DFTD is a specific type of cancer that affects cells in the nervous system called Schwann cells.
For their research, human Schwann cells cancer were super rare and often misdiagnosed.
I will let these men explain how they have done what might well save someone you love in the future.
(Scientist) The normal cells compared to the cancer cells. (Destin) Wow, so you've actually identified the border here. That is interesting.
(Scientist) Yes, because we have a marker for the tumor so it will only stain the DFTD cancer cells.
(Destin) Have you made the marker for the tumor? (Scientist) We have discovered the marker.
(Destin) You discovered the marker? (Scientist) Yes, we did.
(Destin) How long ago did you do that? (Scientist) That was about three years ago. (Prof. Woods) Three years ago.
(Destin) Other cancers, like human cancers, would not it stain? (Prof. Woods) It would spot human Schwann cell cancers, yes.
(Prof. Woods) We discovered this in the devil and we actually got it working on human cancers, so that will help with diagnosing.
(Destin) Wow! So you discovered this staining method for the tasmanian devil and have this
research applied in medical research for people. (Prof. Woods) Yes, yes.
(Prof. Woods) It's only a way to .. (Destin) Do you know what this is? Yes!
(Destin) That's a good thing! That is amazing. (Prof. Woods) It all comes together. (Destin) That's great.
(Destin) I hope you enjoyed this episode of Smarter Every Day. I stand on it can do a very sincere advertisement.
I want to express my thanks to the sponsor of this video. This is Harrys.com. They make razors
and I used them long before they decided to sponsor Smarter Every Day but the fact that they
Sponsoring Smarter Every Day is quite impressive. They could sponsor well-known bloggers and things. She
sponsors a guy who goes to Tasmania to talk about a disease that affects an animal species. That is cool!
Thank you Harry's. If you are interested in buying a razor, go to harrys.com and use the promo code "smarter". I think
That it's worth it. I am going to use a portion of this sponsorship to make a personal donation to it
Devil Facial Tumor Disease research fund at the University of Tasmania by going to the links in the
video description. So please consider doing the same thing. I want the knowledge about Devil's Face Tumor
Disease will spread faster than the disease itself so please also consider to share the video. If this gave meaning
consider your life to subscribe to Smarter Every day or not, whatever. Thank you very much, I'm Destin,
you will continue Smarter Every Day, good day.
(Prof. Woods) And every philanthropist there, this is an absolutely perfect project to be involved.
Actually saving a species. Can you imagine that? (Destin) Yes.
(Prof. Woods) Saving an animal species. (Destin) That's cool.
(Destin) It struck me that there is not a single tasmanian devil cartoon on the wall, anywhere else here.
I expected that when I walked inside. (Prof. Woods) No, no, actually I've never even seen the cartoon.
(Destin) Do not you have that? (Prof. Woods) I have not seen it. I saw a picture of it.
(Destin) Are you serious? (Prof. Woods) I have never looked at the cartoon.
(Destin) And you're the man she's trying to save. (Prof. Woods) I have never looked at the cartoon, no.
(Destin) He has never seen the Tasmanian devil cartoon. (Prof. Woods) I have not seen it.
(Prof. Woods) Do you have it .. (Jocelyn) Are you serious?
(Prof. Woods) Seriously! What would I look at the cartoon for?
(Destin) I do not want to force you to watch it.
(Prof. Woods) I am a nerd, hey, I do not watch cartoons. (Laughter)
(Destin) Greg is too proud to watch the Tasmanian devil cartoon even though he is the man in the world who is trying to save them.
That is very interesting.
(Sound of the tasmanian devil cartoon)
(Prof. Woods) Is that it?
(Destin) That's it. That is the tasmanian devil.
(Laughter) You never saw it?
(Prof. Woods) So what is his role in life?
(Tasmanian devil cartoon sound) (Destin) He destroys things.
(Cartoon sounds)
(Destin) People like it. That is why your research is financed.
(Destin) That's it. (Prof. Woods) That's it.
(Destin) Maybe showing it was a bad idea. (Prof. Woods) Maybe it was a bad idea.
(Destin laughs) I like you. He is a pure academic. I like people like Greg.